
Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton, NJ 08544-1013, USA.
Thirty years have passed since a small group of theorists began applying con-
cepts and tools from industrial organization to the analysis of international
trade. The new models of trade that emerged from that work didn’t supplant
traditional trade theory so much as supplement it, creating an integrated
view that made sense of aspects of world trade that had previously posed
major puzzles. The “new trade theory” – an unfortunate phrase, now quite
often referred to as “the old new trade theory” – also helped build a bridge
between the analysis of trade between countries and the location of produc-
tion within countries.
In this paper I will try to retrace the steps and, perhaps even more impor-
tant, the state of mind that made this intellectual transformation possible. At
the end I’ll also ask about the relevance of those once-revolutionary insights
in a world economy that, as I’ll explain, is arguably more classical now than it
was when the revolution in trade theory began.
1. TRADE PUZZLES
In my first year as an assistant professor, I remember telling colleagues that I
was working on international trade theory – and being asked why on earth I
would want to do that. “Trade is such a monolithic field,” one told me. “It’s a
finished structure, with nothing interesting left to do.”
Yet even before the arrival of new models, there was an undercurrent of
dissatisfaction with conventional trade theory. I used to think of the propa-
gation of this dissatisfaction as the trade counterculture. There were even
some underground classics. In particular, Staffan Burenstam Linder’s An
Essay on Trade and Transformation (1961), with its argument that exports tend
to reflect the characteristics of the home market, was passed hand to hand
by graduate students as if it were a samizdat pamphlet. And there was also an
important empirical literature on intra-industry trade, notably the work of
Balassa (1966) and Grubel and Lloyd (1975), that cried out for a theoretical
framework.
Why did the trade counterculture flourish despite the apparent complete-
ness of conventional trade theory? Call it the similar-similar problem: the
335huge role in world trade played by exchanges of similar products between
similar countries, exemplified by the massive two-way trade in automotive
products between the United States and Canada.
In 1980, this similar-similar trade was still a relatively new phenomenon.
Trade in the first great age of globalization – the age made possible by steam
engines and telegraphs – was mainly dissimilar-dissimilar: trade in dissimilar
goods between dissimilar countries. Comparative advantage, which one may
define as the idea that countries trade to take advantage of their differences,
clearly explained most of what was going on. It was only with the recovery of
trade after World War II, and especially after the major trade agreements of
the 1950s and 1960s, that the more puzzling trade patterns that fed the coun-
terculture became prominent.
Figures 1, 2, and 3 make this point, using data on British trade. Figure 1
shows the commodity composition of British exports and imports on the eve
of World War I. The pattern of trade made perfect sense in terms of classical
comparative advantage: Britain, a densely populated nation with abundant
capital but scarce land, exported manufactured goods and imported raw
materials.
Figure 1. Composition of British trade circa 1910. Source: Baldwin and Martin, 1999.
By contrast, Figure 2 – which shows comparable data for 1990 – offers no
comparably easy interpretation: Britain both imported and exported mainly
manufactured goods. One might have hoped that a look within the manufac-
turing sector would reveal a clearer pattern, but this brings us to the issue of
intra-industry trade: trade in manufactured goods, especially between coun-
tries at similar levels of development, consists to a large extent of two-way
exchanges within even narrowly defined product categories.
336Figure 2. Composition of British trade in the 1990s. Source: Baldwin and Martin, 1999.
And trade, as reconstituted after World War II, did take place to a large
extent between similar countries, much more so than in the fi rst age of
globalization. Figure 3 illustrates this crudely, comparing Britain’s trade with
Europe and with rest of the world in 1913 and 1990.
Figure 3. Destination of British exports. Source: Baldwin and Martin, 1999.
Before World War I, Britain traded remarkably little, by modern standards,
with its neighbors, instead focusing on distant lands able to produce what
Britain could not – cheap wheat and meat, tea, jute, and so on. By 1990,
however, while such trade had by no means vanished, Britain was part of a
European economy in which nations seemingly made a living by taking in
each others’ washing, buying goods that they could and, at least as far as the
statistics indicated, did produce for themselves.
So what was going on?
2. INCREASING RETURNS AND TRADE
It shouldn’t have been that hard to make sense of similar-similar trade.
Indeed, for some economists it wasn’t. In his seminal paper on the rise of
intra-industry trade in Europe, Balassa (1966) stated it quite clearly: each
country produced only part of the range of potential products within each
industry, importing those goods it did not produce, because “specialization
in narrower ranges of machinery and intermediate products will permit the
337exploitation of economies of scale through the lengthening of production
runs.”
Yet this straightforward-seeming explanation of similar-similar trade was
not at all part of the standard corpus of international trade theory circa 1975.
It was not so much that these ideas were rejected as that they seemed incom-
prehensible. Why?
The answer was that unexhausted economies of scale at the firm level
necessarily imply imperfect competition, and there were no readily usable
models of imperfect competition to hand. Even more to the point, there
were no general equilibrium models of imperfect competition readily to hand
– and trade theory, perhaps more than any other applied field of economics,
is built around general equilibrium analysis.
The result was the state of affairs almost triumphantly described by Harry
Johnson (1967): “The theory of monopolistic competition has had virtually
no impact on the theory of international trade.”
Then came the new monopolistic competition models: Lancaster (1979),
Spence (1976), and above all Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). All of these papers
were intended by their authors as ways to address the classic welfare ques-
tions about whether monopolistic competition led to inefficient scale, or
perhaps to production of the wrong mix of products. But when I learned
about the new literature (in a short course taught by Robert Solow in 1976),
I – like a number of other people working independently, including Victor
Norman (1976) and Kelvin Lancaster (1980) himself – quickly saw that the
new models provided “gadgets”, ways to think about the role of increasing
returns in a variety of contexts. And there was, in particular, a near-perfect
match between simple models of monopolistic competition and the stories
already circulating about intra-industry trade.
It quickly became apparent (Norman, 1976; Krugman,1979; Lancaster,
1980) that one could use monopolistic competition models to offer a picture
of international trade that completely bypassed conventional arguments
based on comparative advantage. In this picture, countries that were identi-
cal in resources and technology would nonetheless specialize in producing
different products, giving rise to trade as consumers sought variety. A natural
extension – although, like many things that seem obvious in retrospect, it
was surprisingly hard at first to figure out how to do it – was to bring com-
parative advantage back in. This was most easily done by assuming that all
the differentiated products within an industry were produced with the same
factor proportions; one could then explain inter-industry specialization in
terms of Heckscher-Ohlin, with an overlay of intra-industry specialization
due to increasing returns. And this extension, as represented for example by
Helpman (1981) and Dixit-Norman (1980), in turn meant that the new mod-
els offered an intellectually satisfying explanation of similar-similar trade:
similar countries had little comparative advantage with respect to each other,
so their trade was dominated by intra-industry trade caused by economies of
scale.
338What was really needed to get peoples’ attention, however, was a “killer
app”: a demonstration that the new view offered a fundamentally different
insight into something that mattered. I found that killer app in an empirical
insight by Balassa (1966), who pointed out that trade liberalization among in-
dustrial countries had proved surprisingly non-disruptive, belying fears that,
for example, there would be a major rearrangement of Europe’s industrial
landscape after the formation of the Common Market, and possibly large ef-
fects on income distribution. Because trade expansion had taken the form of
intra-industry specialization rather than inter-industry specialization, Balassa
noted, “the fears expressed in various member countries of the Common
Market concerning the demise of particular industries have not been real-
ized. There are no examples of declining manufacturing industries in any of
the member countries.”
In Krugman (1981), I built a special version of the emerging style of model
to encapsulate this phenomenon. What the model showed was that the clas-
sic Stolper-Samuelson result, in which trade liberalization hurts scarce fac-
tors, can emerge – but only if comparative advantage is strong and/or econo-
mies of scale weak. In the reverse case, which seemed to describe the growth
of trade among industrial countries, trade was win-win.
There was one more significant insight from the application of Dixit-
Stiglitz-based models to trade: Burenstam Linder was right! Once one added
transport costs to the model, it was straightforward to show that countries
would, other things equal, tend to become exporters in the industries in
which they had large domestic markets. As is so often the case, the logic of
this result was obvious once the result had been devised, but not at all obvi-
ous beforehand. Indeed, I began the research that led to Krugman (1980)
with the strong presumption that countries would not tend to export goods
for which they had a large home market – I came to bury Burenstam Linder,
not to praise him. But the algebra said otherwise, and the intuition followed.
Increasing returns provide an incentive to concentrate production of any
one product in a single location; given this incentive to concentrate, trans-
port costs are minimized by choosing a location close to the largest market,
and this location then exports to other markets.
Initially, the “new trade theory” seemed to consist of a series of special-
purpose, incompatible models. It turned out, however, that it was possible
to create a common ground for many though not all of the models, and
extend that common ground to much traditional trade theory as well, us-
ing an insight originally due to Paul Samuelson (1949). In explaining factor
price equalization, Samuelson reversed the usual way we think about trade,
as a process of coming together. Instead, Samuelson thought of trade as the
result of a process of coming apart. He envisaged a Tower of Babel scenario,
in which an angel descends from Heaven and breaks up a previously unified
economy: factors of production suddenly find themselves with national la-
bels, and are only able to work with other factors that have the same national
label. Samuelson pointed out that factor price equalization would take place
if and only if the international distribution of factors of production was such
339that it was possible, even while obeying the angel’s new limits, to reproduce
the production of the pre-angel integrated economy – and that in such cir-
cumstances, specialization and trade could be viewed as being about repro-
ducing the integrated economy.
Elhanan Helpman and I (1985) used the same approach to think about
trade involving both comparative advantage and increasing returns. The
key insight was that in order to reproduce the integrated economy, it was
necessary to locate all production of each good subject to economies of scale
within one country. This approach united factor-proportions-based compara-
tive advantage and specialization due to economies of scale: both could be
viewed as part of how a world economy cursed by Samuelson’s angel undid
the damage.
This approach also, more or less en passant, made it clear that increasing
returns ordinarily reinforce, rather than call into question, the argument
that there are gains from trade. To be sure, in cases where the integrated
economy is not reproduced, it’s possible to conjure up examples in which
countries are worse off with trade than without, in a way that isn’t possible in
pure comparative advantage models. But the clear presumption is that trade
is a good thing under increasing returns – indeed, better than previously
thought.
By the mid 1980s, then, the “new trade theory” had integrated increas-
ing returns more or less seamlessly into our understanding of international
trade. The impossible complexity that had previously daunted economists
contemplating a major revision of trade theory had vanished, replaced by a
surprisingly simple and elegant structure.
But how did that happen? Why did the problems facing the trade coun-
terculture seem to melt away? I’d argue that at the heart of the story was an
attitude shift on the part of international economists.
3. SOME META REFLECTIONS
The emergence of the new trade theory was, in the first place, made possible
by the new models of monopolistic competition. But it did not remain con-
fined to those models; by the mid-1980s recognizably “new trade” approaches
had been taken to trade involving external economies, Cournot and Bertrand
oligopoly, even contestable markets. What made it all possible was a shift in
attitude among trade theorists, mainly consisting of two changes. First, there
was a new willingness to explore the implications of illuminating special cases
rather than trying to prove general results given some broad upfront assump-
tions. Second, there was a change in focus from detailed predictions – which
country produces each specific good – to system-level or aggregate descrip-
tions of the pattern of trade.
On the first point: in the late 1970s many trade theorists thought of them-
selves as theorem-provers. Given big initial assumptions such as constant
returns, so many factors, etc., what could be proved true about trade, spe-
cialization, and welfare? There was, at least in the theoretical literature, a
340push for generality. Yet this generality was mainly spurious: the results were
general given the big assumptions, but those assumptions were, in fact, highly
restrictive, ruling out much of what was obviously true about real-world trade
and specialization.
The new trade theory, instead, focused on strongly special, even silly-
seeming cases. (“Dare to be silly” became one of my principles for research.)
There is no good reason to believe that the assumptions of the Dixit-Stiglitz
model – a continuum of goods that enter symmetrically into demand, with
the same cost functions, and with the elasticity of substitution between
any two goods both constant and the same for any pair you choose – are
remotely true in reality. The assumptions are instead chosen, with full self-
consciousness, to produce a tractable example that contains what older trade
theories left out – namely, the possibility for intra-industry specialization due
to economies of scale.
The use of deliberately unrealistic assumptions is, of course, common in
much of economics. Nonetheless, I can report from early experience that
the new style of modeling was met with considerable hostility at first. Some
discussants dismissed the whole enterprise as obviously pointless, given the
unrealism of the setup. Some even insisted that if all the goods enter utility
the same way, they must be perfect substitutes. There was a widespread sense
that the new trade theorists were cheating.
Meanwhile, even with all that cheating, the new models left some ques-
tions unanswered. Who produces which differentiated product within a
monopolistically competitive industry? The models, by construction, could
not answer that question. We all invoked some notion of randomness, but
without any explicit random mechanism in mind. Instead, what was crucially
involved was a redefinition of the question. The detailed pattern of trade, the
new theorists in effect argued, does not matter as long as aggregate measures
like the volume of trade and the welfare effects of trade can be derived from
the model. In effect, one had to step back from the blackboard and unfocus
one’s eyes a bit, so as to grasp the broad pattern rather than the irrelevant
details.
And once the new way of doing trade theory had been established, it made
its way into pure comparative advantage modeling as well. Most notably, the
important work of Eaton and Kortum (2002) on world trade patterns is based
on a Ricardian model of comparative advantage – but the way it makes pre-
dictions about the parameters of a gravity equation that predicts the volume
of bilateral trade in a multilateral world, rather than about specific goods
imported and exported, is very much “new trade theory” in spirit.
Those who weren’t there, or haven’t participated in a comparable paradigm
shift elsewhere in economics, probably can’t see why these “meta” changes in
the way we did international trade theory were so hard, or made such a big
difference. But they were, and they did. John Maynard Keynes famously de-
scribed the process of arriving at his macroeconomic theory as a “journey of
escape”; the emergence of the new trade theory was a similar journey, if less
momentous, and had a profoundly liberating effect on the field.
3414. GEOGRAPHY IGNORED
Bertil Ohlin’s classic 1933 work laying out the beginnings of factor propor-
tions theory was, of course, titled Interregional and International Trade. It has
always been obvious that the motives for shipment of goods within countries
are similar to those for shipment of goods between countries. It was also
obvious, if one thought about it, that specialization within countries offered
a new and possibly superior source of empirical evidence, if only because
intra-national data are more likely to allow comparisons. So one might have
expected the theory of international trade and the theory of economic geo-
graphy to have developed in tandem, and in close relationship to each other,
with a joint empirical research program.
In fact, however, as late as 1990 international economists took virtually no
notice of trade within countries, or of the location of production in space.
Nor was there really a strong independent presence of economic geography
within the economics profession as a whole. Alfred Marshall (1890) may have
devoted a whole chapter to “The concentration of specialized industries in
particular localities”, but that subject was barely touched on in the standard
economics curriculum. Instead, if economic geography made any appear-
ance at all, it was mainly urban economics, with a very limited discussion of
location theory, with neither sub-field having any significant interaction with
the much more well-established discussion of international trade.
Why was geography ignored by trade theorists? A large part of the explana-
tion is the obvious centrality of increasing returns to geographical patterns:
nobody really thinks that Silicon Valley owes its existence to exogenously
given factors of production or Ricardian comparative advantage. (God made
the Santa Clara valley for apricots, not semiconductors.) As long as trade
theorists shied away from increasing returns in general, economic geography
wasn’t an inviting field.
Also, while there was elegant work in urban economics – I particularly
admired Henderson’s (1987) work on city systems – there was something
deeply unsatisfying about the treatment of increasing returns in much of this
literature. Essentially, the available techniques limited theorists to assuming
external economies, leading to gibes that economists believed that agglom-
eration takes place as a result of agglomeration economies. A particular
problem was that once one is simply assuming positive external economies,
it’s not at all clear how to think about the spatial limits of spillover. Do you
have to be in the same city to reap positive externalities from other produc-
ers in the same industry? If so, why?
Over the course of the 1980s some researchers, notably Fujita (1988),
realized that the monopolistic competition models could be used to derive
endogenous externalities, explaining urban concentration. But these models
depended on the assumption that the monopolistically competitive goods
were completely nontradable, again offering little help on the question of
the spatial reach of agglomeration economies.
342But the analysis of the home market effect, already an established part of
the new trade theory, suggested an approach to economic geography that
did not depend on making goods strictly nontradable.
5. NEW ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY
To lay out the logic of the “new economic geography” I find it helpful to
talk in terms of a “cheat” model – a sort of model of the model – I originally
devised to get some intuition about the home market effect. In this model
we consider the location decision of a single producer serving two markets.
We assume that the producer has fixed sales of S, S* units of a good in the
two markets, with S>S*. And it must pay a transport cost of τ for each unit
shipped from one location to the other. The producer has the option of hav-
ing either one or two plants; by opening a second plant, the producer can
eliminate transport costs but must pay an extra fixed cost F.
Clearly, if the producer opens only one plant, it will be in the larger market.
But will it concentrate production? Only if F > τS*.
It goes without saying that this little exposition ignores market structure,
pricing, the elasticity of demand, and more. But we know that we can put
those things back in by doing a full Dixit-Stiglitz, and the cheat version con-
veys the essential intuition: if economies of scale, as captured by F/S*, are
large enough compared to transport costs, production will be geographi-
cally concentrated, and that concentration will, other things equal, be in the
larger market.
From there it’s an obvious, short step (which for some reason took me
a decade to take) to a model of geographical concentration of factors of
production. Think now of a world in which there are many firms making
the same kind of choice I just described, and also in which some but not all
resources are mobile. Let S be the size of the overall market, μ be the share
of that market attributable to “footloose” production, and suppose that there
are two symmetric locations. Then we can think of a possible equilibrium
in which all the footloose factors concentrate in one place. In that case the
other location – the smaller market – would demand S(1 – μ)/2 units of our
representative good.
And this concentration of production would be self-sustaining if
F > τS (1 – μ)/2, or F/S > τ(1 – μ)/2. So that’s our criterion for the creation
of a self-sustaining concentration of production in space.
As in the original home market effect exercise, this doesn’t quite get it
right, because it fails to take account of market structure and demand elas-
ticity. As I showed in Krugman (1991), it also misses a second reason for
agglomeration: “forward linkages,” which in the simplest case would take
the form of a lower cost of living for workers residing close to production
concentrations. But the essential insights are right:
3431. A self-sustaining concentration of production in space can occur if econo-
mies of scale (F/S) are large, transport costs low, and enough production
is mobile.
2. Which location gets the concentration of production is arbitrary, and can
be presumed to be a function of initial conditions or historical accident.
What was learned from this analysis? For one thing, it immediately cast light
on some important aspects of economic history. Notably, the character of
U.S. economic geography is well known to have gone through a sort of phase
change in the middle of the 19 th century, as the nation became differentiated
into a farm belt and a manufacturing belt. What was happening at the time of
this phase change? The rise of large scale production (economies of scale);
railroads (lower transport costs); and a declining farm share in the economy
(more mobile production). A simple model explains a major qualitative
change in the economy.
This “core-periphery” model, essentially a model of agglomeration, was
the starting point for the new economic geography. It was immediately clear,
however, that one also wanted to model other key aspects of geography, no-
tably regional specialization in different industries and the system of cities.
With a few tricks, especially by assuming increasing returns in the production
of intermediate as well as final goods, it turned out to be possible to address
many of these issues.
As in the case of the new trade theory, a willingness to focus on tractable
special cases was of the essence. In Fujita, Krugman, and Venables (1999)
we described our method as “Dixit-Stiglitz, icebergs, evolution, and the com-
puter”: we used Dixit-Stiglitz-type models to handle increasing returns and
imperfect competition, “iceberg” transport costs that are proportional to
fob prices, simple adaptive dynamics to arrive at equilibria, and numerical
simulation to deal with models that tended to be just past the edge of paper-
and-pencil analysis.
Also as in the case of the new trade theory, the new economic geography
created a style of work that reached well beyond the specifics of the initial
models. New economic geographers rediscovered Marshall’s chapter, which
contained a beautifully laid out trinity of reasons for industry localization:
knowledge spillovers (“the mysteries of the trade become no mysteries; but
are, as it were, in the air”), labor market pooling, and specialized suppliers.
Only the last of these three could be modeled with the original, new trade
theory-inspired models, but the new focus on location led to reinvigorated
interest in the others.
One gratifying result of the emergence of the new economic geography
was a surge in empirical work. Some of this was driven specifically by the new
models, but there was also a broader effect: the new models sensitized econo-
mists to the fact that regional variations in industrial specialization were an
important laboratory for economic ideas, and that there was a great deal of
evidence out there to be exploited. Before 1990 there were few high-profile
economists using, say, cross-city comparisons to shed light on such subjects as
344externalities, innovation, and growth. But after 1990 such studies exploded,
and I believe that this was largely due to the emergence of the new economic
geography.
With the emergence first of the new economic geography, then of a vast
literature on external economies, the increasing returns revolution in trade
and geography reached maturity. The old vision of the world economy,
limited by the assumption of constant returns, had been superseded by an
enlarged vision that incorporated the great tradition of trade theory but went
well beyond it.
However, a funny thing happened on the way to this new vision. It’s at
least arguable that even as classical trade theory was being rejected or at least
revamped, the world itself was becoming more classical, less driven by the
increasing returns the new theory emphasized.
6. IS THE WORLD BECOMING MORE CLASSICAL?
Sometimes the progression of economic ideas mirrors changes in the real
economy. Thus, macroeconomics emerged as a discipline at least in part
because the business cycle became more severe over the first several decades
of the 20 th century. And the empirical observations that motivated the new
trade theory largely concerned the rising role of increasing returns, as op-
posed to comparative advantage, in the growth of trade after 1950.
But there’s no reason the world has to keep moving in a direction that
makes new theories more relevant. And there’s good reason to believe that
the world economy has, over time, actually become less characterized by the
kinds of increasing-returns effects emphasized by new trade and new geo-
graphy.
In the case of geography, in fact, the peak impact of increasing returns
probably occurred long before the new theorists arrived on the scene. Even
in Krugman (1991a), I noted that the 1900 Census contained an extensive
monograph on the localization of industries, emphasizing precisely the
cumulative causation and role of historical accident that became central to
new geography. And the history of such classic localizations as that of the car
industry seemed, if anything, to suggest that concentrations due to increas-
ing returns peaked before World War II. Meanwhile, the manufacturing belt
itself began to dissolve after the war, and especially after the 1950s, as indus-
try spread to the sunbelt.
Work by Kim (1998) seems to confirm the notion that the peak impor-
tance of increasing returns in industry location occurred circa 1930. Figure
4 shows his calculation of an index of regional manufacturing specialization
(first proposed in Krugman, 1991a), using manufacturing censuses. From a
peak in the interwar years, this index has since declined dramatically.
345Figure 4. Regional specialization in manufacturing.
To be fair, this result may in part reflect statistical noise, as old industrial
classifications fail to keep up with the modern division of labor. But the data
accord with common perception: many of the traditional localizations of
industry have declined (think of the Akron rubber industry), and those that
have arisen, such as Silicon Valley, don’t seem comparable in scale.
What about international trade? The rise of the new trade theory was mo-
tivated to a large extent by the rising relative importance of similar-similar
trade: two-way exchanges of goods among advanced economies. For the last
two decades, however, the trend has been in the other direction, with rapi dly
rising trade between advanced economies and much poorer, lower-wage
economies, especially China. One simple indicator of this shift is the average
hourly compensation of workers in top U.S. trading partners, as a percentage
of U.S. compensation (Krugman, 2008). In 1975 that indicator stood at 76,
and by 1990 it had risen slightly to 81, indicating that the United States was to
a large extent trading with countries at a similar level of economic develop-
ment. By 2005, however, the indicator had fallen to 65, largely reflecting the
rapid growth in trade with China and Mexico. In 2006, for the first time, the
United States did more trade in manufactured goods with developing coun-
tries than with other advanced nations.
And nobody doubts that trade between the United States and Mexico,
where wages are only 13 percent of the U.S. level, or China, where they are
only about 4 percent, reflects comparative advantage rather than arbitrary,
scale-based specialization. The old trade theory has regained relevance.
Both new geography and new trade, then, may describe forces that are
waning rather than gathering strength. Yet they’re hardly irrelevant. And
even the fact that they may be losing force is itself an important insight. For
example, the contrast between the deep troubles of the Big Three automak-
ers in the United States and the less afflicted foreign-owned operations,
many of them located outside the traditional manufacturing belt, may in part
reflect the diminishing advantages of being co-located with other producers
in your industry.
Whether the influence of increasing returns on trade and geography is ris-
ing or falling, one thing is clear: much was learned from the intellectual revo-
lution that brought increasing returns into the heart of how we think about
346the world economy. It wasn’t just that economists could make sense of previ-
ously puzzling data, we found ourselves able to see things that had previously
been in an intellectual blind spot. Many people contributed to this process of
enlightenment; I’m proud to have been a part of the journey.
