If you’ve ever been sitting at your desk in the middle of the workday wondering if your job is right for you, I have to tell you—you’re probably not alone. My editorial team and I get so many emails asking for career advice every week, but one topic in particular that we’ve been seeing a lot of lately is changing careers. Is it too late to change my career? When do I know it’s time to look for a new job? I’ve had a change of heart; how do I start my career all over from scratch? These questions can really eat at you if you’re considering a huge career move or a new industry altogether. So today I’m here to give you my two cents about this topic.

My best piece of advice for those of you considering a career change? It’s never too late to do what you love. 

As I am getting older and seeing my friends settle into careers I am realizing how rare it is to know exactly what you want to do with your life. I believe it’s important to see things through and not quit when the job gets tough, but it’s also important to have something about your job that makes you feel fulfilled and brings you happiness. Just because you’ve started down a career path and invested your time in a certain area doesn’t mean you’re obligated to spend the rest of your life in that industry. We are allowed to have a change of heart after years (or sometimes even just a few months) of working in the same field. However, it’s important to remember that you have to be strategic and realistic about the fact that you’re not going to start at the top when you shift your entire professional plan. You might have to go back to school with kids fresh out of undergrad, and you’ll still have to work your way up in your new career, even if you’re experienced in another industry. But that can be the fun part!

The bright side is that, besides taking a leap of faith to do something you truly love, you can probably use some of the skills you learned from your previous job in your new endeavor. Being good at communicating, knowing how to manage others, being punctual… all of these skills (and probably many more) are extremely valuable to any employer, no matter the industry.

Keep in mind that most careers are never a straight and narrow path. Even if you’re staying in the same field but switching jobs laterally, you’re still going to face learning curves. Make sure your heart is in it. Shifting careers will have its ups and downs like any major life change, but if it’s something you truly want, it will be worth it.

I hope my advice helped all of you! If you have more to say, you can always join the conversation in the comments below. I’d love to hear your thoughts.
First of all, I love that you even sent me this question because it shows just how much you care about your friend. Being a good friend is one of the qualities I value most in other people, and I always strive to be a good friend myself. We all go through ups and downs, but having friends by your side is what will get you through the tough times.

If you’ve never dealt with the issues that your friend is going through (a big breakup, a sick family member, etc.), it’s hard to know exactly what to say. Here are some general tips for talking to a friend about a hard time that they are going through:

If your friend is going through a breakup…
A breakup is one of those things that just takes time to get over. Don’t tell your friend that there are plenty of fish in the sea, because it’s probably not what she wants to hear right now. Give her a little time to mourn the loss of her relationship. Instead of saying, ‘It’s time to get over it,” say “This might take time to get over, but I’m here for you in the meantime.” And while she gets over it, help her to focus on the other relationships in her life by organizing a fun night with friends. Boost up her self-esteem by telling her how smart, beautiful, and funny, she is. (And maybe bring a batch of these to her house…)

If your friend has a family member who is ill…
You may not know exactly what your friend is going through, but you can still show your sympathy by saying, “I can only imagine what you’re going through. I know it must be very hard.” Don’t expect your friend to want to share all the details of their loved one’s condition, because it can be exhausting to repeat them to everyone. Instead, just focus on being a shoulder your friend can lean on.

If your friend is ill…
Instead of saying “Please let me know if I can help,” offer to help in very specific ways (ie. “Can I bring you dinner tonight?” or “Can I come over this evening and clean up your house for you?”) Resist the urge to tell your friend that everything is going to be OK, because you don’t always know that. Instead, tell them how sorry you are that they have to deal with this, and how much you love them.

If your friend was laid off…
Getting laid off can make a person feel very vulnerable. Again, I recommend offering to help your friend in very specific ways like reading over their resume or reaching out to other friends for job leads. Also, be sensitive to the fact that they may be on a tighter budget while they are unemployed. Instead of inviting them out to an expensive dinner, suggest that you cook together at home or meet for coffee instead.

Every situation is a little bit different depending on what the person is going through and how they deal with hardship. But in general, I always think that spending time with your friend and just being by their side is the most important. If your friend is not ready to talk about it yet, don’t force it. Just be there for her and let her know you are there to talk whenever she is ready. If she doesn’t feel like going out, bring over popcorn and a favorite funny movie. Being physically present for a friend will let them know that they are not going through it alone.

While I’ve shared quite a few fun date ideas on the site before, the truth is that my best date ever wasn’t super adventurous or creative. It was my second date with my fiancé William. On our first date, I was so nervous that I couldn’t really enjoy myself! But when he asked me on date No. 2, I was feeling a little more relaxed. William wanted to go to a bar to grab a drink together, but I had lost my I.D. and just sent my passport away for my trip to Africa for The Little Market (I know, smooth move…). So, since we couldn’t go to an actual bar, we went to a hotel lobby bar and played cards all night. We literally closed the place down, just playing cards, talking, and laughing. And nevermind the fact that I lost… I actually kind of liked that William didn’t just let me win!

I knew he was a keeper after that night. While it’s fun to spice things up with new activities and adventures, I think that a sign of a strong relationship is when you can have fun doing even the simplest activities together. That’s still true of William and I to this day.

I am so glad that you will be attending the signing! I am already having so much fun on my book tour and love the opportunity to get to meet all the wonderful people who have supported me. Every signing I do is unique to the location so it’s hard to say exactly what to expect, but overall they are pretty similar. I will sign as many books as you bring. If you brought it, I’ll sign it. Also, feel free to ask me any questions that you may have. I often get asked about the fashion industry or how to get an internship, but I am open to pretty much whatever is on your mind. Hope that helps! See you in San Fran!

Hi everyone! I hope you’ve been enjoying our Ask Me Anything month here on LaurenConrad.com. One of the questions that I get asked by readers very frequently is how to pursue a career in fashion. I’ve given my advice on this topic before, but now that I have almost 10 years of experience under my belt, I thought I’d share my knowledge once again. Here it goes…

Don’t Confuse Loving Fashion With Wanting to Work in Fashion
Working in fashion is not always as glamorous as it seems. Just like any other highly competitive industry, you put in long hours and a lot of hard work to get where you want to be. It’s easy to confuse loving fashion with wanting to work in fashion, but they are two totally different things (kind of like how reading for pleasure is totally different than reading for a class you’re taking). For some people, it might make more sense to pour your effort into another career, and then spend some of those hard-earned dollars on a shopping trip! You have to really love the whole fashion industry to want to make it your career.

Explore Your Options
A lot of people might think that working in fashion only means being a designer or a magazine editor. But there are so many different roles within the industry. Keep your options open and find the position that is really right for you. Every fashion brand needs publicists, stylists, sales executives, marketing managers, and more to keep everything running. Find a way to apply your unique talents to a job that really suits you. Click here for some good resources on how to land an internship or job in this industry.

Intern or Assist
Learning from experience really is the best way to get started. If you’re still in school I recommend seeking out internships in the fashion industry. They will help you figure out what you want to do, what you don’t want to do, and give you an opportunity to learn from the ground up. If you’re already in the working world, be open to assistant positions. Even if it means getting coffee for someone, you will also be learning valuable skills at the same time. Stay humble, be nice, and I promise you will work your way up. Many successful fashion industry pros started out as someone’s assistant.

There you have it! I hope my tips inspire you to work hard and pursue your dream job.

This is a great time of year to set goals for yourself. So in the spirit of the New Year, I wanted to share a bit of wisdom that I’ve learned in my career thus far. I’ve been lucky enough to be surrounded by lots of successful women who have helped me get to where I am today. And I’ve noticed that lots of them (myself included!) have some daily habits in common that contribute to their success. Here are 10 of those habits that have served me and my fellow working women well…

1. Check it off.
It might seem simple, but never underestimate the power of a to-do list. Checking off tasks is a great way to keep track of all of the little things you want to accomplish in a day. I find that to-do lists keep me organized and ensure that I follow through.

2. Have a filing system.
If you work on a computer, I highly recommend having a special system for the way you name your files and folders. Whether it’s by content or date, pick an organizational structure that will make them easy to find later on.

3. Watch the clock.
Be on time! Whether it’s for an important meeting or even a casual lunch with girlfriends, being punctual is a sign of respect. It’s also a good habit to make for every area of your life.

4. Be kind.
Some people think you have to be the devil in The Devil Wears Prada to rise to the top. But I beg to differ. The most successful women in my life have all gotten where they are by being kind and supporting each other.

5. Make friends.
The most successful women I know actually aren’t the ones who stay tied to their desks 24/7. They’re the ones who take a time out for happy hour with an industry colleague or a coffee break with coworkers. It’s OK to leave your work for a few minutes to chat. You’ll make important connections and probably feel even more inspired when you get back to your desk.

6. Treat your body right.
If you want your mind to function properly, taking care of your body is key. So take the time to exercise, eat right, and get enough sleep! Your work will suffer if you don’t.

7. Make your bed.
Yes, I am sure that there are lots of successful women out there with unmade beds. But my point is that a clean space makes for a clear mind. So maybe for you a clean space doesn’t mean making your bed everyday. But doing something to tidy up like doing your dishes or organizing your desk can be just as effective.

8. Make time for yourself.
This might seem counterintuitive to a lot of people, but if you want to be successful, I think it’s so important to do something that isn’t tied to your work everyday. Get a manicure, hang out with friends, or find a hobby you enjoy. Being well-rounded and taking time to relax will serve you well and keep you energized and inspired.

9. Keep learning.
The most successful women that I know make a point to learn something new on a daily basis. Whether that’s soaking up information while paging through an issue of Business Insider, taking seminars, or attending conferences, make sure to always learn new skills and stay on top of your industry.

10. Set measurable goals.
Goal setting is so important. Think in the long term, but make your goals as specific as possible and revisit them everyday. Create a vision board or a list and keep it where you will see it every morning. Dream big and you will achieve big things.

Hello lovely readers, it’s Jessi from Team LC again! I am so grateful for all of the sweet feedback from my last post, The Do’s and Don’ts of Your First Internship. Since a majority of you thought it was helpful, I thought I would address the number one question I received from that post with all of you: Where can I find an internship? So today I will be tackling this question head-on and sharing a few tips on where to find your dream internship.

Get Social
It’s no surprise that social media is taking the business world by storm. Your favorite brands now have Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, and many other channels for you to catch sneak peeks and behind-the-scenes information. Another plus? Brands are now featuring job listings online via their social media accounts. Most companies will have a page on their actual websites addressing potential internship and job openings as well. If you don’t see this information, send a friendly email inquiring about future internship opportunities. Don’t be afraid to put yourself out there! Fun fact: I applied for LaurenConrad.com’s internship position because they posted about it on Instagram!

Frequent The Career Center
Chances are that if you’re looking for an internship, you’re still in school. Use this to your advantage! Most companies prefer interns that can get college credit while simultaneously working for them. College career centers have hundreds of local and national companies that are more than happy to hire semester and summer interns. These companies are on your college career center website because they already have an established, positive relationship with one another. Take advantage of this free service while you can!

Check Out Online Resources
Online job and internship hubs are not only great resources but will help you narrow down your search. Internship websites make it easy for you by tailoring your results based on your skills, experience, and interests. If you’re more of a creative type, DesignLoveFest has a job board filled with updated creative job openings. Are you looking for experience in print and media? Ed2010 can help you find your magazine dream job! I’ve personally used Internships.com to land semester editorial internships and have found that their website is user-friendly and updated frequently. Internship websites make it easy for you to get your résumé out into the workforce, and even notify you when they have a listing that matches your skill set.

Polish That Résumé
Résumés are living, breathing documents. It’s important to have an up-to-date résumé on hand just in case you see an internship opening or job position. As you grow, your résumé should grow with you. Think of it this way, your résumé is a reflection of your best accomplishments. Don’t be afraid to show it off! Traditionally, your resume should include your job history, past internships, volunteer work, and education. In today’s job market it’s also beneficial to let your potential employer know what skills you can bring to the table. Are you fluent in Photoshop? Do you have a knack for all things social media? Put it on your résumé! Reminder: Remember to keep your résumé short and sweet. A single page is best.

I hope that you find these internship tips helpful! If you have any other internship-related questions, don’t be afraid to ask them in the comments below.

I must say, I’m pretty excited about this month’s Work It theme on LaurenConrad.com! From the time I was in high school, I’ve always been very career focused. Even way back when I was cast on Laguna Beach, I remember having a discussion with my father about how we could turn the opportunity I was given into a career in fashion (which was always my goal). It’s taken a lot of hard work, perseverance, a supportive family and team, and a little luck, but I am so grateful to have the career I have today.

The best part of my job is that no day is ever the same. Some days I’m working at a pop-up shop for Paper Crown, and other days I’m testing recipes and crafting for this website. I get to fly to New York to work with my design team for my LC Lauren Conrad collection, and travel around the world to meet with artisan groups for The Little Market. It never gets boring, that’s for sure.

So this month, my editorial team and I are going to be giving you some of our best career advice to help you get where you want to be. I’ll be sharing the Smart Girl’s Guide to Networking and my tips on maintaining a work/life balance (which isn’t always easy). We’ll give you 5 ways to stretch at your desk and a list of the best sources to seek out your dream internship. But that’s not all… You can also expect all the fun food, fashion, and crafting blogs you see here every month. And since Easter is this Sunday, we have some adorable egg decorating DIYs coming your way on Thursday. Stay tuned!

